cardio is not effective for weight loss
why isn't it helping me lose weight it
seems like a bit of a head spin there
are two reasons number one is
bad news isn't it that is bad news Dr
Philip lavadia the world renowned heart
doctor has conducted over 3 000 heart
surgeries this book stay off my
operating table fighting to make America
healthy again when you were 40 years old
you described yourself as being morbidly
obese I was 100 pounds heavier than I am
today I was going to end up on my own
operating table I came to realize the
true root cause of our health problems
sugar is more addictive than heroin
processed food is addictive 88 of adults
are not healthy and 600 000 people die
from heart disease every year if we
don't change the course in the next 50
years we're not going to have a society
left
a very young woman and a 30 year old
ended up on my operating table and I had
to go tell her young children I'm sorry
that we weren't able to save
your mother
was her hot condition preventable yes
the surgeries that I do shouldn't need
to be done in the first place I want
people to be healthy again
doctor ovidia what is the diet that's
going to keep my health intact that's
really the million dollar question so
before this episode starts I have a
small favor to ask from you two months
ago 74 of people that watch this channel
didn't subscribe we're now down to 69 my
goal is 50 so if you've ever liked any
of the videos we've posted if you like
this channel can you do me a quick favor
and hit the Subscribe button it helps
this channel more than you know and the
bigger the channel gets as you've seen
the bigger the guests get thank you and
enjoy this episode
[Music]
doctor ovidia
tell me the mission that you're on and
also tell me why you
chose to pursue that mission
so I am on a mission to normalize health
I want people to be healthy again and it
really was my own personal Journey that
set me off on that mission
um I found myself at a spot that I was a
very unhealthy heart surgeon
and it's going to sound pretty
surprising I think to people you know
they think that here I was uh here I am
a heart surgeon
in many ways at the Pinnacle of medicine
um and trying to get people back from
the brink of death and yet
I was headed down that same pathway
myself and I was so unhealthy myself
and I had to figure out how
to save myself
and that has really opened my eyes to
how much
we need to save Society at this point
because we are a very sick society and
we need to be saved when you say you
were an unhealthy hot surgeon give me a
picture of what that looks like in
reality yeah so um I was morbidly obese
I was 100 pounds heavier than I am today
I was pre-diabetic and I was in my late
30s and realized that I was going to end
up on my own operating table so to speak
I was walking the same path that so many
of my patients had walked down
I had family history my grandmother died
of heart disease my father has had heart
surgery
and I knew the path that I was headed
down but I didn't know how to change
that pathway and that's the problem that
I'm really trying to solve for people to
get them to realize how they can change
what many of them see as their destiny
when you think about our Destinies we
often look at our parents and think you
know that's probably the clearest
indicator I have of where I'm going
because of you know genetic and
environmental factors what what when you
look to your parents what did you see
yeah so my parents uh were both
overweight uh had both struggled with
obesity their entire lives and as I
mentioned my father had developed heart
disease and
I was under that same impression that
there really wasn't much I could do
because it was genetic
but I think that's one of the biggest
myths we need to dispel around medicine
today very little of the sickness that
we see so prevalent in society around us
is truly genetic
and the reason that we know this is
because human genetics don't change that
quickly yet in the past 100 to 150 years
we've seen this explosion this epidemic
of chronic disease things like obesity
diabetes even heart disease the very
condition that you know I have spent my
life treating was relatively rare was
almost undescribed
100 120 years ago and so we know that
human genetics don't change that quickly
yet we see these diseases developing so
quickly and that should tell us that
it's not genetic yet almost everyone
when they go to their doctors and they
ask why did this happen
the common answer they're going to get
is because it's our genetics
was there a was there a A Moment Like a
turning point a fork in the road a
moment where you looked yourself in the
mirror and thought today is the day
where I have to make a change
you know there were many times during my
life when I told myself that and I would
make changes and I would have some
short-term success I would change what I
eat I would try and do different
activities I would lose some weight but
like many people have experienced it
didn't last over the long term
uh my Turning Point really came a little
bit unexpectedly for me I was actually
attending a medical meeting
a conference of heart surgeons and uh
the speaker one of the guest speakers
was a journalist by the name of Gary
tops and he had just written a book at
that time called the case against sugar
prior to that he had written
um good calories bad calories and why we
get fat
and as I sat there in that audience
listening to Gary talk uh and Gary
introduced some Concepts to me that I
really hadn't heard before that the
types of food that we eat
maybe more important than the amount of
food that we eat
and it made a lot of sense and it sent
me down a pathway where I started to
think differently about my health
and so I read Gary's books and I
eliminated sugar at first and started
changing the foods that I was eating
and I had the same short-term success
that I had had before I was able to lose
a bunch of weight and I said this is
great
but I realized that something was
different
um because month after month year after
year I was able to maintain it and I was
as I learned more as I walked down this
journey
I came to realize what is at the true
cause the true root cause of our health
problems and understanding those true
root causes of our health problems is
what has now led me to the long-term
success and I can sit here now you know
eight years later and say that I know
that I have truly tackled uh my health
challenges
and now I can help others to be tackling
their health challenges as well what was
the approach that led to short-term but
unsustainable success
usually it was the counting calories it
was eating less doing more uh it was
eating a low-fat diet it was all of the
advice that we have heard our entire
lives it was everything that I had been
taught in school in medical school about
you know how to
educate people on being healthy and yet
what I realized in retrospect
um and I didn't really recognize at the
time admittedly but I realize now is
that it wasn't working for me and it
wasn't working for my patients but I had
fallen into I think one of the common
traps that we fall into and when we give
people advice and the advice doesn't
work we just assume it's because people
weren't following Our advice and we as
individuals but certainly we as a Health
Care system are not very good at
considering that maybe we're giving
lousy advice
you're not just giving advice right as a
medical profession you're also giving
medicine
what's your perspective on medicine and
how has that evolved as you've learned
more about
what I guess you define as
metabolic health
yeah I think my view now is that
medicines should be necessary a lot less
often than we use them
um when we look at our health
we shouldn't really have the Baseline
assumption that we have today that if
someone's in poor health it's because
they're lacking
medicine
it's because we haven't figured out the
right treatment for them
um usually pharmaceutical based
treatments maybe it's going to be a
procedure or surgery but there's almost
a
sort of assumption built into that uh
that the human body is destined to
become ill
that we're destined to develop these
problems and that the only way that we
are going to be able to manage and head
off these problems is by advancing
science by coming up with more
Pharmaceuticals and more surgeries to
treat the problems instead of
considering the fact that it might be
something we are doing to ourselves
there's a book in front of me that says
stay off my operating table by Philip
avadia why did you decide to write this
book what Was Your Mission yeah I wrote
the book because
I struggled
to find this information
I as a heart surgeon I as a doctor I as
someone in the medical system that is
supposed to be built around making
people healthy and keeping people
healthy struggled to figure out the
information that's in that book you know
when you say healthy what what is
healthy
like how does what how does a doctor
like you characterize health
so I Define health today as our bodies
working the way they should
um so you know I talk about metabolic
Health in the book what's that and the
way that I Define metabolic health is
that our bodies are properly utilizing
the inputs that we are giving it and the
primary input that we give our bodies is
the food that we eat
and so when we eat one of three things
is really supposed to happen to that
food
some of it gets turned immediately into
energy
for us to fuel all of the activities
throughout our day
some of it gets broken down
so that we can build and rebuild the
tissues in our bodies processes that are
always going on and then a little of it
is supposed to be stored for times when
energy is not available
and what has happened in our modern
environment is that system has broken
down and we end up storing too much of
the energy and we end up not being able
to ever use that stored energy and that
has a whole host of Downstream problems
that it creates and these are things
like heart disease that I treat every
day these are things like diabetes
cancer Alzheimer's disease all of these
chronic issues that we see becoming so
common
in our society today you're a
heart doctor
what's been the um the most
emotionally challenging day of your
career as a heart doctor
well it's actually the opening chapter
of my book it was the day
that a very young woman ended up on my
operating table
and she did not make it off my operating
table
she came to me with a devastating
cardiac condition
me and my team
spent over 10 hours trying to save her
life but ultimately we could not save
her life
and I had to go tell her young children
that their mother
was not coming home to them
that was
the most challenging day of my
career
and that was a day that I realized
things had to change
that was one of the days that set me
on this pathway that set me made me
realize the mission that I needed to be
on to keep people off of my operating
table
was her heart condition preventable
yes
can you give me some color yeah so she
developed a condition it's called an
aortic dissection where her blood vessel
leading out from her heart tour
and that comes from high blood pressure
and she had high blood pressure that
wasn't adequately addressed wasn't
adequately treated
and I believe that her condition was a
hundred percent
preventable
I believe that if her
Physicians
had understood that her high blood
pressure was because of the food that
she was eating
if they had given her better advice
around the food that she could be eating
and the impact that this was having on
her life
that her path could have been changed
she was metabolically unhealthy in your
view she was metabolically unhealthy
clinically obese clinically obese high
blood pressure
I would say
she had
probably all five measurements of her
metabolic Health abnormal
and no one
although I don't know this for sure no
one likely ever had that discussion with
her and she was young you said she was
very young
under the age of 50. yeah she was 38.
Jesus
this is one of the most troubling
things that I have seen
during my career as a heart surgeon
understand that I started my career as a
heart surgeon 20 years ago
and at that time
we would operate on 70 and 80 year olds
60 year olds it was rare that we would
operate on 50 year olds
today just 20 years later I routinely
operate on 40 year olds and I
occasionally operate on a 30 year old
like that woman
have you ever operated on a 20 year old
not for
you know not someone who wasn't there
it's a different condition different
condition A congenital heart condition
I've operated on 20 year olds I haven't
operated on 20 year olds
um with atherosclerosis
but I don't think we're far from that
point when we look at the fact that a
third of the children
are obese
that we see
metabolic disease
increasingly in teenagers and even
children as young as eight or nine years
old
there are going to be 20 year olds on
ending up on my operating table in not
too long a Time
I was going to ask you earlier on why
all of this matters you know sometimes I
flick around in my head and I I think
well you know if I live to
60 70 you know if I live to 60 but I
just have loads of fun and when I say
fun I'm kind of mischaracterizing fun is
like doing whatever I want and being
driven by my own physiological and
psychological like compulsions basically
which means just you know
junk food whatever whatever or I go
again I can live longer and
um avoid some of those compulsions that
I might have with as it relates to diet
but I think that example you gave of why
it's so important because you you had to
walk out of that operating room and go
and speak to a family presumably young
kids young young kids yeah that were how
old
the youngest one I believe was three or
four you know the older ones were uh
eight ten years old
I'm guessing you'll never forget that
conversation
how how does how do you prepare to have
that conversation with a 10 year old and
a three-year-old about their mother not
coming back
are you trained to do that is you know
there is no training to do that you know
unfortunately I've as a heart surgeon
you know I have that conversation with
family members
um
not infrequently
but having that conversation
um
with children with such a young family
members
[Music]
um
I don't know that there's any way to
prepare for that I certainly wasn't
prepared for it
one of the things that I've come to
realize is no matter how good a heart
surgeon I might be no matter how good
all the heart surgeons out there are
you're always better off if you never
needed the surgery in the first place
and understand that you know
I'm essentially looking to put myself
out of business you know I spent my
entire life
becoming a heart surgeon preparing to be
a heart surgeon I still
love being a heart surgeon but
I realize in the back of my mind every
time I'm doing heart surgery essentially
that I shouldn't need to be doing this I
believe I know that the vast majority of
heart disease is preventable the vast
majority of the surgeries that I do are
preventable shouldn't need to be done in
the first place
and that's why
my mission is so important that's why
I'm doing what I do that's why I wrote
the book that's why I'm here talking to
your audience today
because it doesn't need to be this way
when you when you go into that that
waiting room what do you say
I said I'm sorry
I said
I'm sorry that we weren't able to save
your mother
I said that
your mother came to us
came to me with a devastating problem
and I did everything I could
to try and save her
but her
situation
was not
savable
and I just said that I'm sorry
that your mother
is no longer with you
could you carry do you carry away
from having to have that conversation
over and over and over again yeah I
definitely carry that weight from all of
the times that I've had that
conversation
and you know
whether it's an 80 or a 90 year old
that many people would say they lived a
good life
they did everything they wanted to do
or whether it's a 30 year old young
mother who did not get to see her
children grow up
and whose children need to grow up
without her
the conversation is never any easier
and especially
recognizing
that most of the time they didn't need
to be there in the first place
that they could have
made changes in their life that would
have kept them from getting there
that their doctors
could have given them better advice to
help them make those changes how common
is heart disease heart disease is the
number one killer here in the United
States and worldwide here in the U.S 600
000 people die from heart disease every
year about a quarter 25 percent of the
deaths every year are due to heart
disease so heart disease is incredibly
common
but it wasn't always that way
um it really only became that way within
the past 70 years or so
and we have to ask why
um because if we're going to take the
view which the Health Care System
largely has that Health disease that
heart disease is inevitable
um it's so common it must be inevitable
then why wasn't it always a problem
and those are the questions that I think
we don't do a good job of asking
we as Physicians
have become so busy taking care of all
the sick people that we've kind of lost
the time and the ability to think about
why there are so many sick people to
start with
and so when I look at something like
heart disease and I start to think about
why is it so common why has this become
you know everyone knows someone with
heart disease everyone knows someone
probably that died of heart disease that
has is suffering from heart disease it
literally is all around us and I want us
to step back and start asking why is
that
why is that it's because of the food
that we're eating
um I it's that simple uh when did this
change like you know so there must be a
point in in history where you see
correlation between our diets changing
and heart disease increasing
yeah so here in the United States you
know starting right around 1950 there
was a sharp increase in the incidence of
heart disease
and at the time
um we actually our sitting president
while in office had a heart attack and
this set off the alarm bells and
everyone started asking why you know
where did all this heart disease come
from uh because it's real interesting
you go back to some of the medical
reports from 1900 50 years before and
heart disease is incredibly rare the
leading Physicians of the time would go
their entire careers without really
seeing heart disease so something
changes in a in a pretty short period of
time and
when we you know what does that
correlate with it correlates with the
introduction of processed food
things like uh you know sugar
the consumption of sugar starts Rising
dramatically along with the incidence of
heart disease
packaged Foods processed foods whatever
you want to call them these are the
things that we see being introduced
widespread into society around that time
I am an I am an idiot when it comes to
cardiovascular health so when I ask this
question please explain it as if you're
talking to a monkey what is heart
disease like from a physiological
standpoint what what is it is it my
heart just not feeling so good or is it
might the the
I'm going to think of a big
cardiovascular word here
Atrium
pretty big one ventricle bigger
ventricle Atrium are they blocked with
with I almost if I was to guess what
heart disease was from a monkey mindset
I'd say that the it becomes blocked by
something
is that
about a guess yeah no that's down the
right pathway so realize that there are
a number of different forms of heart
disease but when most people refer to
heart disease they're referring to what
we call atherosclerosis and what that
big fancy word means is exactly what you
were getting to something gets blocked
the blood vessels on the heart get
blocked so realize that the heart is a
muscle
um like any muscle it needs oxygen it
needs blood to carry that oxygen to it
so it can work
now the unique thing about the heart as
a muscle is that it never stops working
until the day we die
so it needs that constant supply of
oxygen and blood and when the blood
vessels that are carrying that oxygen to
the muscle of the heart start to get
blocked start to get clogged
um
there may not be enough oxygen making it
to the heart anymore that's what we call
a heart attack basically that there's
not enough blood flow that there's not
enough oxygen getting to an area of the
heart
and that's the most common cause of
heart disease that's what most people
are referring to when they say heart
disease what is blocking the flow of
oxygen to the heart well you know that's
really the million dollar question so
when you look at it under the microscope
what you see is uh plaque builds up in
the blood vessel and that plaque is
composed of uh cholesterol fatty stuff
and it has calcium in it and you know
when you really get into the microscopic
levels it has uh some of the blood cells
both the red blood cells which are
oxygen carrying cells and white blood
cells which are our immune cells are all
involved in these plaques
so
when we were first trying to figure out
what was causing heart disease and the
early
scientists the early Physicians were
looking under the microscope and they
were seeing that there was cholesterol
in these plaques and they said it must
be cholesterol
and fat in the foods that we are eating
that are causing these problems made a
lot of sense and we set down a pathway
to try and get people to eat less
cholesterol
we set down a pathway of developing
drugs that lower cholesterol and it
would make perfect sense that that would
take care of heart disease and yet here
we are 70 years later and people are
eating less cholesterol and people are
taking medications to lower their
cholesterol and yet heart disease isn't
going away and it's actually getting
worse so we have to step back and say
maybe we were wrong
about it being cholesterol that was
causing the heart disease in the first
place
and maybe it was and maybe it was
something else uh so you know when we
look at what else might it be and again
when we go back to the early days of
this science the other thing that was
talked about was sugar
and there were many leading scientists
again going back to the 1950s who were
saying that it was sugar that was
causing this problem because sugar
damages blood vessels again we know this
uh that Sugar damages the lining of the
blood vessel
and maybe the cholesterol is there to
repair that damage
that
theory that hypothesis makes a lot of
sense we have a lot of scientific
evidence to support that theory yet that
theory got buried it got the other
Theory one out that it was the
cholesterol in the diet and like I said
it makes sense to go down that pathway
and we can see how we started pursuing
that but we need to step back now 70
years later seeing that it's not working
and maybe saying that maybe it was sugar
all along maybe it was sugar in the
first place do you believe it was sugar
um I don't think it's only sugar I think
sugar plays a large part in the process
and the way that I look at it is we have
to look at what leads to Sugar building
up in our bloodstream and this is
another important concept to understand
because most people think oh well the
reason that we get high amounts of sugar
in our blood is because we're eating too
much sugar
and that's indirectly true but the
reason that we end up really getting
high amounts of sugar in Arrow
bloodstream is because our metabolic
Health what we kind of started talking
about earlier gets broken so we have to
look at what's breaking our metabolic
Health if we really want to get to the
root of this problem
okay let's let's look at the what are
the markers then that my metabolic
health is broken how do I know sat here
now because I there's a Girl Scout
outside the studio and I just bought
some cookies off her so I'm trying to
figure out whether I should eat them or
go get a refund
um so how do I know if my metabolic
health is intact because there's often
been a debate you know people might
think it's just based on my my waistline
circumference of my waist but I remember
reading once upon a time that like sumo
wrestlers are significantly healthier
than like most most Americans so what
are like how does One Look by looking at
themselves understand if they are
metabolically healthy or not yeah so you
know there is just by looking at
yourself you may not be able to tell um
but it turns out that your waist
circumference is one good thing you can
look at in yourself and in general
having a larger waist circumference uh
is an indicator of being in poor
metabolic health is that the biggest
indicator
um it's one of the five indicators
um it's the easiest one for us to tell
just looking at it by ourselves the
other indicators are our blood pressure
um so you know almost everyone when they
go to the doctor they get their blood
pressure checked every time and the
reason that we check people's blood
pressure so commonly is because it is an
indicator of health of metabolic Health
specifically
some other measurements you can't tell
just by looking at yourself you need to
get your blood work checked you need to
see what the level of sugar in your
blood is what we call the fasting blood
glucose level
and then you do need to know what some
of your cholesterol levels are but
importantly and this is one key thing
that I want people to understand is
we're not focused on the cholesterol
measure that most doctors talk to you
about what we call the LDL cholesterol
or nicknamed bad cholesterol which is an
inaccurate nickname but not important
right now we want to look at two of the
other measures of cholesterol what we
call the HDL cholesterol again nicknamed
good cholesterol and we want to look at
your triglyceride levels and when you
look at those five measures those five
measures will tell you whether or not
you're metabolically healthy or not but
the problem is as you were talking to
you can't just look at yourself and know
what those measures are you have to
put the effort in to figure out if
you're metabolically healthy or not the
statistics are actually pretty shocking
because we have statistics again here in
the United States uh looking at data
from 2016 that show that 88 of the
adults in the United States are not
metabolically healthy so when you look
at those five measures they can't meet
all five measures of optimal metabolic
Health that's nearly everybody that's
nearly everybody and you can say well
maybe it's all of the obese people
um but when you look at people who
aren't overweight who aren't obese 50 of
them are not metabolically healthy you
talk about this concept of being skinny
fat yep in your book yeah I think my
friend called me that one day when he
was trying to insult me
um a couple of years ago what does what
does skinny fat mean what is what is
that yeah so skinny fat um it will
oftentimes be referred to as tofi thin
on the outside and fat on the inside and
what that really means is that we have
internal fat around our organs
specifically in our abdomen around our
liver around our pancreas around our
kidneys that may not be obvious from the
outside
um many of us kind of know what this
looks like you know someone who's got
skinny arms and skinny legs not a lot of
muscle but they have a little bit of the
pouch in the middle
um that is skinny fat and again unless
you're measuring it unless you're
looking for it specifically you might
not pick up on that and
it is a big problem many people you know
uh hypothesize that actually getting fat
getting obese on the outside is a
protective mechanism
um because it's really when you get fat
on the inside that we see the damage
start to occur things like diabetes
things like heart disease really start
to manifest when you get fat on the
inside so you think being skinny fat is
worse from a metabolic Health standpoint
than being
fat
on the outside it very well can be and
oftentimes the problem with the people
who are skinny fat is they don't get
picked up on until we're much later in
the process until they're much sicker so
that's one of the issues with being
skinny fat and one would only know if
they were skinny fat really by going and
getting some of those key metabolic
Health markers checked in terms of their
triglycerides their their blood glucose
levels Etc exactly
okay
so I'm trying to be in that 12 percent
that of of people
um that are metabolically healthy in
that meet at least all five of the
criteria for metabolic Health there's
I've had so many girls from this podcast
recently that have talked to different
diets the carnival diet keto you know we
talked about the Mediterranean diet a
gluten-free diet vegetarian veganism
it's a lot yep there's a lot you know
and
my question to you and I know this isn't
necessarily an easy question to answer
but what is the diet that's going to
avoid my metabolic Health breaking down
going to keep me off your operating
table and keep my health intact
which diet should I go for Dr Philip
yeah so you know I go into it uh in the
book and what I really tried to look at
was what are the common things amongst
all those diets that will keep meta
people metabolically healthy or make
people metabolically healthy and really
it comes down to eating whole real food
elimination of processed food I think is
the most important step if you want to
get metabolically healthy and remain
metabolically healthy and within that
framework there are lots of different
possibilities some people have great
success as a carnivore some people have
successes vegans you can do keto you can
do Mediterranean you can do Paleo you
can do lots of things in between but
when you really look at what is the one
commonality that we can point to that
will
predict the best success of being
metabolically healthy it's eating real
food eating whole real food
what is whole real food yeah great
question because sometimes it's hard to
tell these days yeah uh so the rule that
I you know the the kind of rule that I
give people around eating whole real
food is eat the things that grow in the
ground and eat the things that eat the
things that grow in the ground
um so these are going to be your plant
products and these are going to be your
animal products so your pro animal
products because I am very Pro animal
products I actually think that when you
look at the balance between the two
um you're probably better off eating
more animal products uh than more plant
products and again that's something that
goes very counter the mainstream
narrative understand that as human
beings we evolved eating animals we
evolved eating meat
our bodies are uniquely designed to
process that meat
our bodies are not well designed to
extract nutrients from plants and in
fact when you really look at the sort of
evolutionary system what developed is
that the the animals
especially ruminant animals with
multiple stomachs they are designed to
extract nutrients from plants
those nutrients end up in their muscle
in their meat and then we are designed
to get the nutrients from the meat so I
do think that
meat animal proteins are essential to
human health and
yes being a vegan is going to be
healthier than eating a diet full of
processed food the sort of standard
Western diet but I don't think it's
optimal for human health ultimately
quick one as you guys know we're lucky
enough to have blue jeans as a sponsor
and supporter of this podcast for anyone
that doesn't know blue jeans is an
online video conferencing tool that
allows you to have slick fast good
quality online meetings without any of
those glitches that you'd normally find
with other meeting online providers you
know the ones I'm talking about and they
have a new feature called Blue Jeans
basic which I wanted to tell you about
blue jeans basic is essentially a free
version of their top quality video
conferencing and that means that you get
immersive video experiences you get that
super high quality super easy and zero
fuss experience and apart from zero time
limits on meetings and calls it also
comes with High Fidelity audio and video
including Dolby voice they also have
expertise grade security so you can
collaborate with confidence it's so
smooth that it's quite literally changed
the game for myself and my team without
compromising quality at all so if you'd
like to check them out search
bluejeans.com and let me know how you
get on DM me tweet me whatever works for
you let me know how you find it I've now
been a fuel during Drinker for about
four years roughly so much so that I
ended up investing in the company and I
play a role on the board of the company
but they also very kindly sponsored this
podcast and to be honest I've never said
this before but he all believed in this
podcast before anybody else the CEO
Julian
um told me before we even launched the
podcast how successful it would be and
that heel would back it and I absolutely
have a huge amount of gratitude for them
for that support but an even greater
sense of gratitude for the fact that
they've helped me stay nutritionally
complete throughout the chaos and
hecticness of my tremendously busy
business schedule so if you haven't
tried out here which I hope most of you
have at least given it a go by now try
it out it's an unbelievable way to try
and stay nutritionally on course if you
have a hectic busy schedule and let me
know what you think send me a tweet and
a DM tag me let me know what you think
back to the podcast
practice have you seen any recurring
Trends based on people that have
consumed a vegan vegan diet
yeah so I think a well-constructed uh
vegan diet a um what you know probably
should be better called a you know Whole
Food plant-based diet
um is a significant improvement over the
Western diet over the standard American
diet over a diet with a lot of processed
food and that's really what you see when
you look at the scientific literature
around vegan diets it's an improvement
over the standard American diet
but it's not necessarily optimal and
especially over the long term so the
story that I see uh on a recurring basis
is that someone will be eating will
really not be paying attention to what
they're eating they'll just be eating
the food that's around them the standard
Western diet and they'll be in poor
health because of that
and they'll decide to make a change and
because there's a lot of messaging
around it oftentimes a vegan diet is
going to be the first one that they try
and they're going to feel better
initially they're going to improve their
health initially their metabolic Health
markers will improve
over the long run it becomes fairly
difficult to maintain a good vegan diet
you have to be supplementing there are
certain essential nutrients that we
cannot get from plants and no one argues
that the vegans don't argue it they just
say okay I'm going to take my
supplements it's hard to get the right
amount and the right balance of proteins
and amino acids from plants and again if
you're supplementing you can do it so
the people that I see have a long-term
success on vegan diets are often working
very hard at it and they're very
carefully planning and like you said it
becomes hard to do on a day-to-day basis
unless you're really putting a lot of
energy into it in chapter 8 of your book
you say our ancestors didn't evolve to
take supplements so we shouldn't be
taking them either yep
you believe that I do believe it I do
believe that any diet that's optimal for
humans shouldn't require supplementation
and so when I look at the opposite end
of the spectrum when I look at people
who are doing a carnivore diet and
eating all or at least primarily animal
proteins
they usually don't require
supplementation and they uh are thriving
on long-term carnivore diets and I think
it's a more ancestrally consistent diet
and I think that it is
um
in a lot of ways easier to maintain uh
you don't have to quite do all of the
planning that goes into a vegan diet but
ultimately I'm happy
as long as someone is getting
metabolically healthy and staying
metabolically healthy on whatever diet
they're eating and so I don't I'm not
dogmatic I don't tell all my patients
you need to be carnivore I work with
people on vegan diets ultimately I want
to help people understand
how to get metabolically healthy how to
maintain metabolic health and if they do
it as a carnivore if they do it as a
vegan if they do it somewhere in between
I'm happy for that and I believe that
should be our measure of success when
talking about metabolic Health you know
you lay out these seven principles that
will help us achieve that
optimal metabolic Health one of them and
the first one you say is to reframe
Health as a system not a goal
what does that mean yeah so I think this
is a real important first step in this
process
um it's really the mindset behind it and
when I say I want you to think of your
health as a system not as a goal
um what I mean is that I don't want us
so focused on the short term which is
one of the mistakes that I oftentimes
see around health
so many people you know we kind of
talked about it earlier will say
they recognize that they're unhealthy
and they want to make a change
oftentimes this is around their weight
and they'll set a short-term goal
they'll say I want to lose 20 pounds and
one of two things is going to happen in
that scenario you're going to make a
bunch of changes
hopefully you're successful you lose the
20 pounds and you say great I
accomplished my goal now I can go back
to what I was doing beforehand because
that's just the natural uh inclination I
think that we have as human beings
um we don't want to continue to put that
work in
um the other possibility is that you
don't meet your goal you don't lose the
20 pounds because it's actually hard to
lose 20 pounds and you get frustrated
and you give up and you go back to your
old habits so instead what I encourage
people to do is think about their health
as a system and think about the habits
that are going to support that system
it's a more positive way to think what
are the habits that I can adopt to
support my health
more sustainable people can do that over
the long term because when we're doing
positive things to improve ourselves we
can do that over the long term if we're
taking away things if we're restricting
ourselves we aren't very good at doing
that over the long term number four of
your seven principles for metabolic
health is about exercise
um in the book if I remember correctly
you say that exercise isn't the best
approach isn't the only approach one
should consider when thinking about
dropping weight and reducing waist size
a lot of people might be surprised by
that
yeah so um some of the concepts that I
talk about in the book around exercise
um the way I uh phrase it is I want you
to get more activity
um one of the mistakes that I see people
making is that they
um focus on doing periods of exercise
they say I'm going to go to the gym and
work out for an hour I'm gonna go
running you know for an hour and they
don't pay attention to getting enough
activity throughout the rest of their
day uh so
um I try to get people to refocus on
just getting more activity throughout
your day
and then when it comes to your exercise
and your metabolic Health the most
important part of building metabolic
Health through exercise is going to be
building and maintaining your muscle
muscle is very unique when it comes to
our metabolic health
muscle is
metabolically active throughout your day
and so when you focus on building and
maintaining muscle it's going to better
support your health your metabolic
Health
than if we're just trying to do the
cardio exercise and burning the extra
calories during that time that we are
exercising because you say here on page
keeping in mind that research shows
cardio is an unreliable tactic for fat
loss that's a shock to most people
because we've been taught that cardio is
everything right
so when we look at the science around
cardio
um you know chronic cardio exercise uh
what most people think of as jogging or
running at the gym we see that it
doesn't help for weight loss doesn't
help for fat loss and that's why I don't
want people
to focus on cardio
um and you know when we look at the
macro level of this
we have more gyms today than we ever
have
people spend more time at the gyms doing
cardio than they ever have and yet we
have a worse obesity problem than we
ever have so cardio
is not effective for weight loss science
is pretty clear on that doesn't mean
that cardio doesn't have benefits and
I'm not telling people stop all the
cardio that you're doing I just don't
want people to think that only by doing
cardio are they going to be able to lose
weight and lose fat and have long-term
success around that why you know I think
that surprises people because you know
when I do cardio
um I sweat yep and I can feel it just it
feels like the fat is melting and it's
pouring off my skin
so I'm like you know I must be losing
weight right but so it seems like a bit
of a head spin that that that's not
helping me lose weight why isn't it
helping me lose weight yeah there are
two reasons that it doesn't help you
lose weight number one is uh for most
people after they do a lot of cardio
they get hungry and they eat more so
they kind of counter balance whatever
extra calories they may have burnt off
uh doing the cardio
is that is that inbuilt or is that just
you know is that the brain I think it is
I think it's our body's sort of
homeostatic mechanism
um and the other problem
um with you know thinking you're going
to uh lose weight
just by doing cardio is it's really
relying on the calories in calories out
model so again the underlying assumption
there is that if we just burn more
calories
um that will compensate for the extra
calories that we've been eating and
again we see that that doesn't work over
and over again we know that our body
actually adjusts the amount of calories
that it burns and if you go and you do
that hour at the gym during that hour
you're going to have burnt more calories
but during the other 23 hours of the day
your body is actually going to burn less
calories to make up for that
well
that's bad news isn't it that is bad
news uh and you know the extra point
there is when we build muscle muscle
build muscle burns more calories
throughout the day so that's the other
reason that the focus on muscle building
is really the most effective way uh
to exercise your way to weight loss so
okay so weightlifting you would advise
as a preferential way to lose fat and
improve our metabolic Health versus just
like going for a jog right even if I'm
burning 500 calories on my jog versus
500 burning 500 calories doing weight
lifting you think that the weightlifting
calories burnt are more important for
weight loss than the jogging calories
yeah so when we look at the science
around uh building muscle resistance
exercise as I said we see two unique
benefits to building muscle number one
is that that muscle is going to be more
metabolically active tissue that we're
going to have on us all the time so
we're going to be burning more calories
throughout the day
despite you know the activity that we're
doing but aren't we just going to get
more hungry
um we don't seem to get more hungry from
those uh I guess from that metabolic
activity it's not the same as doing the
cardio making us more hungry
the other unique thing about muscle
though to understand is that as we age
the more that we are able to maintain
muscle
the better quality of life that we have
and the longer we are going to live and
again this has been shown in uh repeated
studies many different areas heart
disease included that building and
maintaining muscle as we get older is
one of the best strategies for living
longer and for living better it's a bit
of a downward spiral though isn't it
because you know I get older maybe I'm a
little bit more inactive maybe I retire
um and then I lose muscle and as I lose
muscle I become more inactive and the
spiral the cycle continues
so that you know but it doesn't need to
be that way we can maintain muscle uh
throughout our older age and the key is
to doing that is to maintain your
metabolic health is to be eating enough
protein is to be eating whole real food
and is to be continuing to do resistance
exercise resistance activities
throughout your lifespan and we can
actually maintain muscle as we get older
one of the ways in your book that you I
said we should
um maintain on metabolic Health one of
the tactics to maintain our metabolic
health and stay off your operating table
is to sleep more and I wondered why why
does sleeping more improve my metabolic
health
yeah so sleep
um really has again unique benefits
related to metabolic Health
um
when we sleep
um that's the time that our body is
really doing that rebuilding uh process
that is so key to us maintaining Health
um
we see
a unique
sort of uh two-way relationship between
sleep and metabolic health
and this is important for people to
understand this
when we are metabolically unhealthy our
sleep suffers if you're not sleeping
well it can be a key indicator that you
may not be metabolically healthy we also
know that people who sleep less are more
prone to being metabolically unhealthy
um
many different reasons why that might be
but ultimately what I focus on is that
in order to be metabolically healthy you
need to be getting enough sleep
and if you're not getting enough sleep
it very well may be a sign that you are
not metabolically healthy
can you give me maybe one hypothesis as
to why that is why my metabolical health
will cause my sleep performance to
decline
well one obvious uh thing that we can
point to is sleep apnea uh sleep apnea
becomes very common as you get
metabolically unhealthy what's sleep
apnea uh so sleep apnea is basically
when you stop breathing for short
periods of time while you're sleeping
and we know it's very closely related to
uh metabolic disease
I now have worked with many patients who
have improved their metabolic health and
their sleep apnea goes away and again
the traditional view on sleep apnea in
medicine is that it needs
some procedure
sometimes that's a surgical procedure or
it's things like wearing masks to treat
the sleep apnea and what we don't do is
ask why we have that sleep apnea in the
first place and again it seems to be
related to our metabolic health and one
of the
fairly consistent things that I see in
people as they improve their metabolic
health is their sleep gets better and
those that have sleep apnea it
oftentimes improves or even goes away
completely when they improve their
metabolic health and there's a weight
loss component to that but we even see
this in people who aren't overweight
they have sleep apnea they improve their
metabolic Health they don't even
necessarily lose weight as part of that
process and yet their sleep apnea goes
away when you were 40 years old you
describe yourself as being morbidly
obese yep did you have sleep problems
um I probably did I was never really
diagnosed with it but my wife would
certainly tell you I I used to snore a
lot
right
and you still have this any sleep
problems at all now no I don't
um I no longer snore and I feel well
rested every morning when I wake up so I
no longer have sleep problems you think
you no longer so we can never be certain
for sure a chapter two of your book you
say that there's 12 deadly food lies and
you highlight the 12 deadliest of those
food lies
um one of them we've talked about
already which is and that's the first
one in the book which is that only obese
people are metabolically unhealthy
um we've talked about that a little bit
one of the the surprising ones
um out of the list is that
you seem to have a have had a real
I guess perspective change over the
years about the role of the profession
that you're in and at times in your book
you seem quite critical of doctors I
think even when you when you talk about
the seven principles of metabolic health
number seven of those principles is
you're encouraging people to get a
doctor
that understands it get a doctor who
gets it yep
do you ever receive pushback from your
own industry for being somewhat critical
of the way that this the system is
designed in the perspective they have
towards medication and medicating things
and whacking them all once them all read
its head versus
preventative measures
yeah I certainly do get pushback
um but
um and as you said I am critical of my
own profession because we as a we as the
Health Care System we as medical
practitioners need to be asking
ourselves are we doing good enough and
when we look at a society
that everyone is unhealthy we touch on
the statistics before
we can't
absolve ourselves of that responsibility
for getting us to this point
big food
big food is part of it what is big food
in your view like what's how do you
define that
um it's the processed food industry uh
that's all around us it's the vast
majority of what is presenting presented
to us as food these days when we walk
into the grocery store when we walk into
the supermarket the vast majority of
what's in there is not whole real food
it is not designed to support our health
what's it designed for
profits for the food industry
that's um that's pretty much alludes to
point number four in your 12 deadliest
food lines you say the people who
produce our food want us to be healthy
you say that's a lie they do not want us
to be healthy
well it's not that they do not want us
to be healthy it's that that our health
is not a concern of theirs
they are an industry
as an industry their goal is to increase
their bottom line is to support their
profits
they don't care whether or not we're
healthy is part of that
and quite frankly they don't have a
reason to
if you are a food company your goal is
to get people to buy more food to eat
more food so what are you going to do
you're going to design foods that make
people hungry more often and that's
exactly what processed food does
the problem with these processed foods
is that they're supplying us with
calories they're supplying us with
energy
they're doing that look basically
cheaply
and yet they're not providing our bodies
with the nutrients that they need so our
bodies are constantly seeking those
nutrients
and therefore we find ourselves always
hungry
and that is the main problem with
processed food that we end up taking in
an abundance of energy without meeting
the nutritional needs that our body is
looking for what about fasting you've
talked you know I I've often been I
think recently because we've had a few
health food related fitness related
guess on the podcast I've started
thinking a lot about fasting so for
example yesterday I had one meal for the
whole day
um
and I've stuck because I I sometimes
reflect I go in search of Answers by
looking at how I assume our ancestors
used to live right and I can't imagine
that we were necessarily grazers do you
know what I mean I can't imagine that we
were like cows in fields just eating all
day every you know throughout the entire
day exactly so it's accurate in your
view yeah I think that's very accurate
and we you know ancestrally and even you
know again we don't have to go that far
in history if most of us ask our
grandparents or our great grandparents
depending on how old you are
um how often they eat they're usually
going to tell you two times a day maybe
three times a day
the average person today consumes
calories eight times a day
um and you know do the math if you're
asleep for eight hours and you're eating
eight times a day you're eating every
couple of hours what's the hum
um the harm is that our bodies uh never
get the opportunity to burn the stored
energy that we have and so we just end
up building up more and more stored
energy and we reach that point where our
bodies can't do that any longer and the
metabolic processes start to break
how could you how good are you at
following your own advice
um I think I'm pretty good at it these
days because I'm giving myself better
I'm giving myself better advice in the
past I wasn't good at following my
advice like I said you know I would tell
myself all the time eat less move more
count your calories eat a low-fat diet
and I wasn't good at maintaining that
today I'm good at maintaining the advice
because it's better advice that I'm
giving myself so I'm not going to sit
here and tell anyone that I'm perfect
um you know this isn't a hundred percent
of the time but it's pretty darn close
one of the things that I often hear when
we have
um you know Health experts or doctors or
anybody that understands kind of our
physiology
um our health at a deeper level or is
qualified in that department What I Hear
often in like the the comment sections
or from our audiences
um I think they Search for nuance in the
advice that they're being given like
they want to know you know can feel like
you can feel like an expert a health
expert is saying don't eat the [__]
birthday cake your birthday's canceled
yeah you know and no one wants to cancel
their birthday everyone wants to have
the cookie from the Girl Scout that I
just bought earlier on yeah like what
where is the like you know is there is
there a middle point if we're talking
about this cardiovascular epidemic and
this heart disease epidemic where is the
like middle middle ground where I can
live my life I can eat the cookie from
the Girl Scout but I can still be
metabolically healthy
yeah so I think um that's going to vary
uh depending it's going to vary person
to person this is why I think the
metabolic Health measures are so
important
um this is why tools like a continuous
glucose monitor can be so powerful uh
because depending on your situation that
answer is going to be different
um I can certainly tell you that you
know nine years ago when I was morbidly
obese
Every Girl Scout cookie I ate uh was
making me more metabolically unhealthy
today uh now that I am metabolically
healthy yeah I can have an occasional
Girl Scout cookie and it's not going to
break the system do you want one um not
right now
I bought three packs she was so
persuasive anyway sorry yeah they are
um so you know
ultimately this is why I Rely so much on
the metabolic Health measures
um this is why I want people to be
paying attention to these things uh
because
each of one of us needs to figure out
how we can improve our metabolic Health
um
what I find what's most interesting I
guess I'll say about this and this is
personal experience and this is also the
experience that I have with my patients
is the more metabolically healthy you
get
the more you want to remain
metabolically healthy
when we figure out how to properly fuel
our bodies and we figure out what we
should be feeling like on a day-to-day
basis we don't want to go back to being
unhealthy we don't want to go back to
feeling
like we used to when I think about what
the struggle it used to be for me to get
through a day as a busy heart surgeon I
would be tired all the time I would be
in a bad mood I would be hungry all the
time
and today
being metabolically healthy that's no
longer the case I have abundant energy
to make it through my day people will
listen to this advice the information
you give your book you know this podcast
the listen to it and then a lot of
people will make zero changes as a
result of it I mean you must have seen
that in your practice over and over
again where maybe you have recurring
patients you're saying the same thing to
every day and you you know that them the
health markers as it relates to
metabolic Health are getting worse and
worse and worse
why don't we listen
ultimately I think we don't listen
because we don't believe that it's
possible to be healthy anymore I think
one of the biggest
problems I see is we look all around us
and we see that everyone's unhealthy
and we just assume that we can't be any
different well if you if you're one of
those 88 percent
who look around and see you know people
everyone I mean everyone you must look
out nine and ten will be metabolically
unhealthy so you must think that's the
norm the bar must be lowered per se
exactly
um what I want ultimately you know we
started talking about the mission that
I'm on and the mission that I'm on is to
give people hope
for them to understand that they can be
healthy that they don't need to end up
on my operating table that they don't
need to be relying on the pharmaceutical
industry for the last half of their life
um on that point though if the forces
that stop us from heeding the advice
we're given and that we know to be true
it's not that I think a lot of time
people know this stuff like they know
that certain foods are good certain
foods are bad we're at that point now in
the kind of public Consciousness as it
relates to health where if you walk me
through a supermarket I think I'm
probably at the point now where I can
say listen I know that's bad I'm gonna
get it anyway but I know it's bad
um but also you could walk me through
and say you know the aisle where you
have whole foods that have been grown in
the ground or the aisle where animals
who eat the stuff that's growing in the
ground are and I know that's good for me
but as it relates to like the forces the
psychological forces that are stopping
me from eating that food every day
what are those forces I'm assuming
there's a chemical component to it there
certainly is we we have the data you
know that processed food is addictive
you know sugar is addictive
um you've probably heard you know uh
that sugar is more addictive than heroin
and that comes from studies uh where
they look at uh you know the addiction
centers in the brain and how much they
light up uh with these different uh
chemicals and there's evidence that
sugar is as addictive if not more
addictive than heroin and sugar is like
an everything sugar is in everything the
food industry again they know this
um it's not
an accident uh that the most addict what
may be the most addictive substance on
the planet is in everything they're
trying to sell us it's there for a
reason if I give up sugar today
like a drug like heroin is does it does
the desire for me to have it again Wayne
over over time to the point where I
won't
have the compulsion to go grab
the cookies anymore my personal
experience is yes it does you know I can
I can certainly say today uh you know 10
years ago if you had asked me do you
want the Girl Scout cookies the answer
was always yes uh today I can say I can
live without the Girl Scout cookies
um so yes I I I do know that that uh
like any other addiction
um
after a period of time uh it becomes uh
less of a temptation
we'll see how you respond to the cookies
when the cameras stop rolling and we
have a a new little tradition that we
have started on this podcast these are
called The Diary of a SEO conversation
cards right so at the end of every
podcast our guests for the last couple
of years have written a question for the
next guest in this book we've now turned
them into these conversation cards you
can see on the back of the conversation
card a QR code where you if you scan it
you can watch the answer and find out
who answered it and on the front it has
the question written and the name of the
person that wrote the question so you
can play these at home with your friends
if you want to have the kind of
conversations we have here on the Diary
of a CEO get a little bit deeper with
them and hopefully build your
connections with them now usually what I
do is I spread them out in front of you
and I let you pick one but I'm actually
going to stitch you up so I'm gonna pick
one for you to answer are you up for it
I'm up for it okay let's do it let me go
for one that I think will be
difficult
okay here we go this is the one I've
picked for you I might pick another one
we'll see
so the question is tell me something you
have never told anyone before and that
was asked by Gary Neville
I
am not sure that I can
solve the problem that I'm trying to
solve
I'm not sure that I can complete the
mission uh that I now know
I was put here
to fulfill
our problem
around health
might be too big for me to solve
but I'm not going to stop trying
do you think it's too big for us to
solve like at your core do you think
we're going to change direction as a
society
do you do you honestly believe that
based on everything you know big food
big Pharma the way the human brain is
wired the direction of travel of
humanity
do you really believe people are going
to stay off your operating table
yes or no answer
yes I do believe it
but I am concerned
the effort
I'm concerned that we have gotten too
far down the pathway that we may not be
able to
truly solve this problem I think
ultimately
not everyone is going to be able to
extricate themselves uh from the
situation that they're in are you
married I am married have you you live
in Florida right I do go to a nice house
in Florida I imagine you do as a heart
surgeon it's pretty nice house if I had
if I asked you to bet
the person you love
and your house in Florida
on whether we'd be in a better position
in terms of the Health crisis
and our overall metabolic Health in the
Western World in a better or worse
position
in 50 years time
which way would you place your house and
your wife
in 50 years I'm gonna bet we're gonna be
in a better position because
if we're not in a better position in 50
years we're not going to have a society
left
and that I truly believe what do you
mean by that
I mean that we are literally collapsing
under the weight of our own health
problems and if we don't change the
course in the next 50 years
I worry that
for my children
there isn't
I worry that for my children
there aren't going to be enough healthy
people left in the world
to maintain Society for us
have you ever had any psychological
support for because because if I had
your job I think I'd have a lot of
sleepless nights and I reflect on that
conversation you had to have with that
30 year old mother with the kids
have you ever sought out psychological
support or had therapy to support you
with the weight of that
what I would describe is trauma
I haven't
um the way that I think I am able to
deal with it is
there are lots of positives you know
there's another patient
whose life I can save uh or whose life I
can improve and
fortunately I guess this the statistics
are in my favor
um the vast majority of the time the
surgeries that I do turn out well and
the patients do survive and I have
improved their lives
and
I get that positive feedback you know
they come back and they see me in the
office
um
they
are able to express to me
their thanks for improving their lives
so
in the end I know I'm having a net
positive in the world
but it doesn't change how hard
it is when we don't get the positive
outcome that we're looking for
Philippa I would have to agree I think
that you you definitely are having a
positive impact in the world and I think
your your approach to targeting the root
causes of the problem as opposed to just
the problem itself once it's sometimes
too late
um is an important conversation that we
need to be having and you know people
people must wonder why I've had so many
of these like health related food
related
um
conversations and on this podcast and
it's because I'm I'm on that Journey as
well I'm on the
um on the road to learning more about
how I can live a
not just a longer life but a fuller life
you know life extending my life is one
thing but adding quality to my life over
that extended period is in my view
probably more important because I have
no interest in living to 100 if I'm
gonna be
um if I'm not going to have Mobility if
I'm not going to be able to
walk up the stairs and if I'm not going
to be able to enjoy the life that I've
extended and
so I really love having these
conversations about how we can all do
that together and as I said recently I
think when I'm speaking to a health
expert or speaking thing I'm speaking to
Simon sinek I said all of these things
you know food Health cardiovascular
health all of these things are
fundamentally related to us being better
as humans whether it's as entrepreneurs
or actors or artists or whatever we want
to be the the foundation the First
Foundation of Our Lives is is our health
without it we have nothing and if my
health were to to go because of
decisions I've made or because of chance
or luck or genetic heritability whatever
it might be
um everything I am everything I've built
everything I love my dog
my team this show would unfortunately
come to an end I'm sure they're trying
to replace me
but I would all unfortunately come to an
end and so that means that your work is
um the most important work anyone can do
in my view because it is our first
foundation so thank you for doing that
work Philip we have a closing tradition
on this podcast you've answered one of
our Stitch of questions already but
the last guest always leaves a question
for the next guest in the diary of the
CEO
and the question that's been left for
you is
what advice
did you get from someone earlier in your
career that you followed but now
in hindsight wish you hadn't and why
oh I love that question
that is a great question call them out
Philip Magic
so I'm gonna say that the advice that I
had followed earlier in my career that I
had gotten from my mentors that I wish I
hadn't followed
was
to stay in my Lane
um
many times in medicine we
are we pick our specialty I chose to be
a heart surgeon
and
the advice was always
just to focus on doing the heart surgery
and what I realize now is that
I need to be treating the whole patient
I need to not only be thinking about the
heart surgery that I'm doing
or that I've done on that patient
but I need to be thinking about the
whole patient and why they got there in
the first place
and what we can be doing to change their
course
working further Upstream working further
Upstream addressing the root cause of
their problems and
even after they've been on my operating
table
I don't want them coming back I don't
want heart disease to continue to be
a problem in their life so
I realize now
and I try to implement now uh that I am
addressing that whole person and I'm not
just addressing their heart disease
well Philip I hope you're the best of
luck in your mission and I I am I do
believe that in 50 years time because
I'm an eternal optimist I do believe
that will be in a very much better place
as it relates to metabolic Health in
part because of the education and the
information that people like yourself
are committing their lives to sharing um
your book is fantastic thank you for
writing it very accessible
um for someone like me who might not
know the most about cardiovascular
health but I really enjoyed it and I
really enjoyed our conversation today so
thank you thank you
[Music]
oh